---
layout: page
title: Race Rules
permalink: /rules/
---
These race rules and procedures are designed for the safety and well-being of everyone involved in the race including runners, crews, volunteers and spectators. The runner is responsible for knowing all the rules. Failure to comply with these rules may result in the disqualification of the runner.

Runner Responsibilities:

1. Aid Stations closed to crews and spectators – Runners’ crews and spectators are not allowed at Hwy 210 (water) or Peterson’s aid stations! Failure to adhere to this will result in runner disqualification! As a runner participant you are responsible for your crew and spectators understanding this limitation.
2. Road crossings – Vehicles have the right-of-way at all times. There are some busy road intersections on the course, do not be complacent and forget to look both ways before crossing. We will have run officials at the busiest crossings. They are there to stop runners, if necessary, not cars. But ultimately, you need to be responsible for your safety. Never assume a vehicle will stop for you!
3. No unauthorized aid caches/drops or crew help – No one is allowed to cache, drop or store supplies on the race course before or during the run. Runners are not allowed to receive aid between checkpoints from their crews.
4. Do not litter – Either carry your trash or leave it at the aid stations. We are operating under permits from the City of Duluth and the State of Minnesota and litter could threaten the acquisition of permits in the future. Littering along the trail will be cause for disqualification.
5. Cut-off times – Cut-off times will be strictly enforced at the turn-around and at each aid station thereafter. Decisions are final, no exceptions. Please refer to the aid station chart for cut-off times. Sweeps will be taking down the course behind the last official runner. Anyone refusing to vacate the course will be disqualified!
6. Checking in / checking out – It is the runner’s responsibility to properly check-in and check-out of each aid station. Race numbers must be clearly visible.
7. If you decide to drop out of the race – If any runner is unable to complete the run, the runner must notify the aid station captain and surrender their race number. Upon surrendering their race number, the runner is officially out of the race.If a runner leaves the race and does not show up at the next aid station within a reasonable time, run officials will assume the runner is lost and notify authorities. This situation will cost the race time, money, hardship and credibility. It may also threaten the race’s ability to acquire necessary permits for future races. Leaving a race without informing the aid station captain is grounds for disqualification and restriction of entry in future races.
8. If you get lost or injured – If you get lost or injured, stay on the trail and wait. Inform another runner that you are injured and ask that they notify race officials at the next aid station or checkpoint.
9. No pacers allowed – No one that is not registered and running the race is allowed to run with a competitor for the purpose of pacing and support.
10. No course cutting – Runners must follow the marked course at all times. If the runner departs from the marked course, the runner must return to the point of departure on foot before continuing. Please do not cut switchbacks on the course. Switchbacks are designed to ensure the sustainability of the trail. Doing nothing to risk the sustainability of the trail we are using will ensure that we will be able to use it for future races.
11. Passing other runners and trail users – All runners will meet other runners coming toward them on the trail. Please be considerate of runners coming your way on the narrow trail. Runners going uphill please step off the trail for runners coming downhill. In most cases the runners going downhill will be going faster and concentrating on their footing. It’s easier for the uphill runner to step off the trail.
12. Road crossings – The main concern is the safe movement of pedestrian and vehicle traffic. There are not that many busy road intersections on the course, but do not be complacent and forget to look both ways before crossing. Vehicles have the right-of-way at all times.We will have run officials at the busiest crossings, especially early in the race when runners are grouped together. The runner is a pedestrian and must obey all directions of the race official and all laws pertaining to road pedestrian crossings.
13. Relieving yourself – It’s a fact of life, so must be mentioned. Solid human waste should be buried (find a stout stick and dig a quick hole with it) well off the trail and away from water. Liquid waste should not be deposited on the trail itself or near water. You should be at least 100 feet from any water source when relieving yourself. A non-entrant in the race should not see you relieve yourself.
14. Have Fun!
